>>REGINA MEREDITH:
We're picking up
with part two of our
conversation with Jay Dyer, who
analyzes hidden
symbolism in film
to give us an idea
of how Hollywood
might engaged in the
programming of our minds.
In this show, we cover
"Eyes Wide Shut,"
"The Kingsman," "Ex Machina,"
and "Casino Royale."
So last time we were
doing three films,
we barely even
mentioned the third one.
And since we're
trying to do four now,
I thought we'd start
booking right through this.
>>JAY DYER: OK
>>REGINA: So first
of all, we're going
to start with "The Kingsman,"
which is such a kooky, silly,
fun film.
But there there's a fair amount
embedded in it, and of course,
just the shocking aspect
of the plot itself.
So lay out a little
bit of the plot.
And of course, the key stars
are Colin Firth and Samuel L
Jackson.
>>DYER: And Michael Caine.
>>REGINA: Yeah,
and Michael Caine.
And Samuel L Jackson has
a very pronounced lisp.
He's the gentle type.
>>DYER: But a psychopath.
>>REGINA: Yeah, a psychopath.
>>DYER: Well it's
funny that you mention
it being goofy and silly,
because a lot of times
satirical films are the ones
that will have a lot of truth,
and even some of these
deeper archetypal symbols
and so forth.
So what's interesting about
"Kingsman" is that the title
itself, I think,
identifies the roundtable,
the idea of the Arthurian
legends and so forth,
and the Grail, and all this.
And what's funny about
the Templars, which
is connected to that idea,
is that in the history
of actual black operations
and intelligence operations,
there have been groups
in deep secret societies
that are calling
themselves the Templars.
In fact, William
Colby who was head
of the CIA for a while,
his secret group,
he called them the Templars.
>>REGINA: Some of the Templars
would be ashamed to hear that.
>>DYER: It's just a name that
has been appropriated, right?
So definitely, if you
can go all the way back
to the beginning of
the Templars and how
they were treated,
and even the Vatican
itself has rescinded that
condemnation of the Templars.
And we get the
impression that it
was at the behest
of the Frankish king
that the Templars
were prosecuted.
It was made up.
So what's funny about
this film is that you
do have a lot of these themes.
I mentioned William
Colby in the CIA.
You have these themes
of, in this case,
British intelligence
utilizing people
that they've recruited
from the lower
classes of British society
into making them into genteel,
or into one of the agents
of the elite, essentially.
And in the case of Valentine
that you talked about,
the Samuel L Jackson
character, he's
this big tech giant
who he's dead set
on depopulating the world.
And of course, as always--
>>REGINA: For
environmental purposes.
>>DYER: And as always, there's
the breakaway civilization
for the elite.
They're going to go off
and have their own palaces
and whatnot, and
kill the rest of us.
>>REGINA: They've got
their little chips.
>>DYER: Exactly.
So that's what's key to this is
that he utilizes the cell phone
technology.
Last time we mentioned
Brzezinski's book
in ELF/VLF technology.
And this is what Valentine
is doing in the film,
is that he's utilizing
this technology
to alter people's brainwaves to
essentially make them maniacs.
They go nuts, right?
Killing each other,
attacking each other.
And it's the role that Michael
Caine plays Eggsy's handler,
and recruit him into this secret
cabal of British intelligence
agency.
And his role is to, he
thinks, foil this plot.
But as we discover,
spoiler alert,
Michael Caine actually
works with Valentine.
>>REGINA: Right,
that was interesting.
That happens toward
the end of the film,
so erase if you want to
see it, doesn't matter.
Still a fun film.
But you know, I found
this compelling.
And it's interesting that
you made that correlation
with the knight Templar,
because the original knight
Templar were purely
ascetic individuals.
>>DYER: They were tasked
with guarding the pilgrims
to the Holy Land, correct.
>>REGINA: They were.
And they usually were of
the higher class initially,
often of nobility.
>>DYER: Warrior monks, right.
>>REGINA: Warrior monks.
They gave up
personal possessions.
They followed a certain dictate.
But that dictate was
actually to protect
assets from confiscation by
royalty in the day in England,
for example.
So I mean, they considered
themselves quite
righteous warriors.
Now, we know the story gets
distorted as time goes on.
But I bring that up because
in one clip of the film,
Colin Firth, his character--
I think his last name is Hart--
is explaining to Eggsy,
little street boy who's
just trying to keep it real,
the nature of this organization.
Let's take a look at
that clip of film.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- And in this case, I'm
offering you the opportunity
to become a Kingsman.
- A tailor?
- A Kingsman agent.
- Like a spy?
- Of sorts.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>REGINA: Now, when you
come back from this,
you think, well, the poor kid's
had a really rough go of it
in life.
And on one hand this man is
offering him an opportunity
at perfecting himself.
Excellence across the board.
And keeping peace and calm
within his being at all times
amidst all of this.
Yet at the same time, it's
all in the name of state
and agendas of the state.
And Eggsy, he's buying it.
He's like, I have nothing to
lose, like he says, you know?
>>DYER: Yeah, he's
streetwise, and that's
why he's useful to
the intelligence
apparatus in the film.
And what we see in the process
of the training, I think,
is the most telling.
Because what they do
is they continually
traumatize all their recruits.
And of course, the
culmination, the climax
of this traumatization is you've
got to kill an animal or a pet
that you really found dear.
>>REGINA: When I saw the movie
the first time, I hated that.
I hated it.
>>DYER: Well that
is perfectly what
we see in actual
training of, for example,
the Phoenix program in Vietnam.
The soldiers there were
tasked with actually
killing women and children.
And that was in order
to traumatize them.
And there's a great book
that deals with some of this
called "Programmed to
Kill" by Dave McGowan.
And in that book, he
talks about killing pets,
and that this is an actual
aspect of ritual abuse.
So that we see a parallel
between the secret societies
and the ritual abuse aspect
of things and the way
that the intelligence apparatus
cultivates and marinates
people in trauma before they're
ready to go out into the field,
and we're going to see
that with Bond, too.
>>REGINA: Yes, OK.
So killing in the
name of the state
is considered an honorable duty.
>>DYER: It's a virtue, right.
>>REGINA: It's a virtue.
So you have to
traumatize the individual
to be able to do what is
unconscionable, right?
And yet at the
same time, there's
this sexy quality of
being a gentleman that
is well rounded, well
educated, can defend himself,
and so forth.
And this creates an interesting
split in our own psyche.
Because women are totally
turned on by Bond, right?
And by someone like
Colin in "The Kingsman."
So what's going on
there more archetypally?
>>DYER: This is the
idea of ubermensch,
or the idea of a
psychopathic killer
who can also play
different roles.
And of course, in
intelligence work
you have this ability to act.
That's why all the way
back to Shakespeare,
in that time period, actors
have been used as spies.
This is an ancient profession.
And the ability to
play another role
is crucial to fooling
whoever you need to fool.
It also plays into
sex espionage.
And this film does
touch on a lot
of sexual issues, as
Bond will, of course.
But if you go back to,
say, the NKVD of Stalin,
and the way that Stalin would
actually recruit Russian sex
operatives was out of
orphanages or out of the streets
with prostitutes.
And what they would do is
they would bring them in,
and they would degrade them.
So I know that it sounds like
they might already be degraded,
they're prostitutes,
but the goal
was to degrade them
as far as possible so
that they no longer had any
taboos or moral hangups.
And then that's when you've
created the perfect killer,
because they're not bound by
any of the morals of society.
No taboos, no
moral restrictions.
And that's what's happening
to Eggsy in the film.
He's already
streetwise, and they're
taking him through
this process, even
though it's under the guise
of the good of the state.
But it reminds me of
a famous conversation
that Bond has in the
beginning of "Casino
Royale" in the novel.
And he's talking to, I
believe, Vesper Lynd.
And I'm not trying to get ahead
of us, but it applies to this.
Because Vesper Lynd,
or someone says,
why do you do what you do?
I'm working for the
Soviets, I'm doing
the exact same
thing you're doing,
it's just a different side.
Who cares?
And Bond says, you know what?
You're right.
It's Manichean dialectics.
He says this.
He says it operates on
Manichean dialectics.
And so since it doesn't
matter, he says,
I've transcended good and evil.
And that's directly out
of Nietzsche's philosophy
of ubermensch, that you can
be beyond good and evil.
And that's a perfect
ideology for a killer.
And so it's that
class of persons
that are given that worldview.
They're cultivated and
programmed with that worldview
that there is no good or
evil, and you're beyond it,
you make a great killer.
>>REGINA: And you're usually
an ideologue of some kind.
Just like the people
I've interviewed
that have been involved
with intelligence, and some
that I've known.
There has to be a chink in the
character just to be recruited.
>>DYER: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: And there has to
be extremely high potential
in terms of their ability
to develop themselves.
>>DYER: Right.
>>REGINA: And so this is what
we're finding through Eggsy,
the guy from the hood.
>>DYER: Yeah, the profile.
He fit their profile, what
they wanted, what they needed.
Correct.
>>REGINA: Right.
OK, so let's talk about the
public's complicity in this.
It looked like an Apple release
of the first iPhone, right?
>>DYER: Exactly.
>>REGINA: Oh my god, people
are lined up for miles
down the street to
get the free SIM card.
So let's talk about
that part of the story.
>>DYER: The session
with the tech gadgetry
is a big part of
Valentine's plan.
>>REGINA: And free.
The word, free.
>>DYER: Right.
And we think of all
the marketing ploys
that we see around
tech gadgetry, right?
And I think in the
last episode we talked
about the Schwitzgebel
machine, which it's
an actual device that's about
tracking and tracing everything
that you do and all of your
health issues, and so forth.
And that's what's
happening in this film,
is the same principle of under
the guise of free baubles
and trinkets, you're
actually signing
on to something
that's very, very bad.
And the SIM cards, as
we said, ultimately
result in a kind of ELF/VLF
manipulation of human brain
frequencies.
>>REGINA: To the limbic system,
which has to do with violence.
>>DYER: Exactly.
And that's what
Brzezinski talked about.
There's other Pentagon
documents that
talk about psychological
warfare, "MindWar to PsyWar"
by Colonel Aquino.
This document talks
about the utilization
of these same frequencies
and of harp type technology
to mind control
mass populations.
>>REGINA: Right.
And even our antagonist
in this, Colin Firth,
finds himself subject to this.
And let's take a quick
look at that clip of film.
What happens once those SIM
cards have been activated
in the Church of bigots.
We said this was silly.
And we'll just watch
it for a little bit.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
[PULSING SOUND]
- I asked you to sit
down, my friends!
To resist--
- Like the infidel you are!
He will not save me!
[END PLAYBACK]
>>REGINA: That's when Colin
Firth came out of this
and said, what did you do?
What did you do to me?
I could not control myself.
I couldn't help myself.
And he became, of course,
he was highly skilled.
The most brutal in the group.
The good thing is there really
isn't any actual blood or even
red paint in this.
It's really more like a cartoon
in terms of the violence.
So everybody has at it,
and this happens just
by tweaking the frequency
of those SIM cards globally.
And they can create it
in zones of the world
to foment political unrest,
or stage it at certain events.
I'm going to ask you this.
How real do you think that
technology is right now?
>>DYER: There was a early 2000s
article from the Boston Globe
that reported on
this very technology.
And it was about DARPA's
ELF and VLF towers.
And could these be used
to send out frequencies?
It's very hard to find that
article on the internet now.
Maybe if you logged
into the Boston Globe
archives or something,
you could find it.
But it's not easily
findable, and I
think that's for a reason.
And that's because even though
this technology is real,
it's not easily discoverable.
So how many public statements
have we had about this?
Only a couple that I can think
of from big policy people,
from white papers,
from big tomes,
from people like Brzezinski.
So even though they'll
kind of gradually
let these things be
known to the public--
I mean, I don't think
they're worried about people
reading Brzezinski's books.
>>REGINA: No.
>>DYER: But but
they will gradually
let this stuff be
known, and I think
that the end of
the space program
is an example of something
that has been gradually
they've let out details.
Or the Manhattan
Project over time.
But they keep things
secret for several decades.
>>REGINA: But they
exploded this one
as the bomb right in
the middle of this film
that millions upon millions
of people have seen.
>>DYER: Well, this
is I think I titled
this the ultimate conspiracy
film of all time, right?
I mean, it's so conspiratorial,
and it's so real because--
>>REGINA: And so silly, of
course, embedded in satire.
>>DYER: As satire,
that's another technique
of psychological warfare.
>>REGINA: I was shocked when
I saw the film the first time
and I thought, here it
is hiding in plain sight.
This is more than plain sight,
it's in your face, literally.
>>DYER: And the whole film
is about depopulation.
It's about eugenics,
it's about getting rid
of a majority of the
population of the Earth.
Now, it may not come in
such a cartoonish fashion
as it is in the film.
>>REGINA: As peoples'
brains exploding.
Which is really just funny.
Little colorful clouds
of brains exploding.
>>DYER: Glitter, I
think, comes out.
>>REGINA: Glitter comes out.
But this brings
me to a question.
How do the producers and
directors, on one hand,
we think, how do they
get away with that?
Again, this is a
really negative agenda.
We talked about this a
little in the last show.
How do they get away with
such a film being produced
unless there's some
ulterior motive for us
being exposed to this concept?
>>DYER: I think
in the film world,
you have different
motives at times.
So sometimes people
will write screenplays,
or they'll produce a film
with good intentions,
and they really want to
get a good message out.
I have friends that have worked
in different media fields
and art fields that
I think are sincere.
And so they'll put
conspiracy related themes
or these kinds of
things into their works
to try to raise awareness.
But I think other times
you also have a technique--
it's been written
about, actually--
where as I mentioned
in the last show,
Revelation of the
Method, where you can
condition people to
acceptance of these things.
>>REGINA: No one's going
to accept that, though.
You watch this film,
you can't imagine
how there could be any program
to essentially get people
into a state of acceptance
of this kind of technology.
It's abhorrent.
>>DYER: Maybe not for
the technology itself,
but what I'm saying is
that you can embed messages
into people's subconscious
through these kinds of programs
that conditions them.
And they might grumble
about it, they're
not going to do anything about
it when these kinds of things
are instituted.
And I think that
it already exists.
It's just that we're
not as aware of it.
Because if there's
one article that
speaks of the DARPA ELF/VLF
towers that's been scrubbed
from the internet, I mean--
>>REGINA: I hear you on that.
But again, looking at it was
so blatant, in your face,
and abhorrent.
>>DYER: It's gaslighting.
>>REGINA: That you
think, no, there's
no one that caught
this that would
succumb to that kind of
programming in the future.
And yet, we know that there is
a very interesting relationship,
I think, even in terms
of headquarters proximity
to each other between
the CIA and Hollywood.
We know that the
CIA has their hand
in any film of any presence
at all, unless it's
an Adam Sandler film.
Maybe even then, I don't know.
>>DYER: Well, this
is interesting,
because I go into that
in my book quite a bit.
And you can go all the way back
to the beginning of Hollywood.
The early days, the
golden age, silver age.
And the Pentagon and the
Department of Defense
have been working directly
in films for a long time.
Take the character of Howard
Hughes, right the billionaire
aerospace engineer.
Howard Hughes used
to make movies.
He made "Hell's
Angels," which was
the biggest film of his day, it
was like the big blockbuster.
And it was a war
propaganda film.
So this has been going
on for a long time.
It's nothing new.
And you can even look at
"Twilight Zone" episodes.
A lot of them are
made in cooperation
with the Department of Defense.
So they were intended to be kind
of recruitment propaganda, war
propaganda.
There have been whole
academic journals and books
written on this.
There's a book,
"Hollywood in the CIA"
by Tricia Jenkins out of
the University of Texas.
Her book is really good.
My book's good.
And I trace a lot
of these examples
and how they do see these
things into films on purpose.
And we don't always
know the intention.
>>REGINA: Yeah, I can't--
on this one, this is a tough
one because it's so blatant.
I can't understand what
the intention would
be except to have people
alert enough to say,
I'm not buying into whatever's
is coming down the pike.
>>DYER: There's a similar
film from the '70s called
"Logan's Run" that I
dealt with in my book,
and it has the same idea of
a superstate dystopia that
is killing everybody,
and they intend
to kill everybody who
reaches the age of 30.
And then you go through
this religious ceremony
where you float up, and
then you're incinerated.
But they've cultivated this
through a religious mythology
to convince the
population that you go off
to Valhalla or whatever
when you incinerate.
>>REGINA: It's like "Soylent
Green," except 60, 62,
something like that.
>>DYER: Yeah.
And so it's that
same idea, I think
you can look at why
are they showing us?
Well, I think if you look
at the '70s dystopias,
the trend was to
expose these things.
You've got so many
films to do that.
You've got "Omega Man,"
you've got "Logan's Run."
Even "Zardoz," that goofy
film with Sean Connery running
around in underwear, that film
actually exposes a lot of this.
It has a good positive message.
And then I think we
see a shift as we
get into the '90s and the
2000s, where the films
take a much darker turn.
They take a very cynical turn.
And they are, I
think, nihilistically
showing what's going to happen,
or what they plan to do.
And so I guess you can debate
what the purpose of that is.
But I see it as
a kind of, again,
what we talked about
last time, brutalization
and desensitization.
Even though it's
satirical and in the end
the bad guys are foiled,
will they be foiled?
>>REGINA: Yeah, what it seems
people walk away with is,
that's pretty weird.
They just dial in a frequency,
my cell phone's in my pocket,
and I start hitting my mother
in the face, or my baby?
>>DYER: Well, yeah.
That may be a little
Hollywoodized, right?
>>REGINA: It's Hollywoodized,
but that's what I'm saying.
People are looking at--
I would go away from that
if I didn't know any of this
and think, gosh, I
mean, I wonder what
they can do with SIM cards?
>>DYER: Well, that
technology is real.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
And I'd be thinking about that.
That's why I say, that's the
only question I had about it.
It's so in your face
that certainly it
can't be just part of a
predictive programming.
>>DYER: Right.
I'd like to give the
benefit of the doubt
and say that they would like
to get a good message out.
>>REGINA: One of the people you
talked about is Colonel Michael
Aquino.
>>DYER: Mhm.
>>REGINA: Talk about that for
just a minute before we wrap up
on this.
>>DYER: Well, what's interesting
in terms of his relationship
to this film, as I
mentioned, is that he
wrote a famous psychological
warfare document called
"From MindWar to PsyWar."
And he was in charge of
army PSYOPS for a while.
He was basically saying
that what we need to do
is transition out of these older
forms of military propaganda
and think in terms of
a new tech dominated
strategy of changing people's
minds and perceptions.
And so he also echoes
Brzezinski's statements
about the ELF, the
electromagnetic frequency
manipulation through the towers.
And he even mentions
chem trails,
he even mentions geoengineering,
and spraying the skies,
and altering the biosphere.
So it's not just about
changing men's minds,
it's also about the changing
of man's whole environment
and atmosphere in totality.
And that's the
reason that people
can't conceive of
these things is
that it's so outlandish
and so wide scope.
Full spectrum dominance
in the fullest sense,
including the biosphere.
But Aquino is interesting
because what he talks about
in his, I believe
that was written
in the late '80s, early
'90s, that document,
with another Colonel.
It deals with the possibility
of radical forms of manipulation
of human biology and
human thought processes
through these frequencies.
And that's why it's
so frightening.
But I don't want to give off
the impression of being fearful.
I don't think we should be
fearful of these things,
because we know about them.
>>REGINA: And we always
hold the trump cards.
>>DYER: We don't
have to be afraid.
But he was explicitly involved
in his satanic group, right?
>>REGINA: Was Douglas Dietrich?
>>DYER: He has exposed some
of that, correct, right.
>>REGINA: I interviewed him.
>>DYER: OK, great.
Yeah, the group that
he was involved with,
I think that their idea
of black operations
is borrowed from black magic
and ancient philosophies
of black magic, if you will.
And so they've applied
those techniques
to psychological warfare in
this document that he authored.
And that's what's
fascinating about it,
is that you see these
ancient techniques.
Again, we mentioned
Plato last time.
These ancient techniques
are being reflected now.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And indeed, I'm really happy
you said-- and we're having fun.
We're just kind of showing
what they're up to.
What Hollywood and the
CIA are up to, just kind
of pulling back
the curtain a bit,
and it really is not meant
to instill fear in anybody.
The reality is, these
kind of programs and games
have been going on,
and the nice thing
about doing this
kind of program is
that we can just almost laugh.
>>DYER: Exactly.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Once you see it--
>>REGINA: An affront to us
when you see it right there,
that it's believed
that we're so stupid.
I love it.
And so I don't look at
it fearfully at all.
I just look at it as,
isn't that interesting?
And now we know one
more area to avoid.
So now, "Eyes Wide Shut."
That's not a happy film, but
it's one that always comes up.
Stanley Kubrick, Nicole
Kidman, and Tom Cruise.
And who knows what was going
on in their personal life?
But whenever it was was
complicated, as we all know.
And so let's talk about that
matrix of players, characters,
and the beginning of the film.
The two towers, yeah,
she's undressing, right?
>>DYER: Interesting
that we have,
I think, Kubrick again showing
us what really goes on.
We saw this with
"2001," we've seen it
in basically all of his films.
"Dr. Strangelove," it
parodies the Rand Corporation.
"Barry Lyndon" parodies the
class structure of Britain.
"Lolita" deals with pedophilia.
I mean, every one of
these films is amazingly
insightful to the real world.
>>REGINA: How did he
get away with all that?
>>DYER: I don't know.
Now, his daughter
Vivian, she argues
that he was an honest
artist, and he really
wanted to get the truth out.
And I've read a lot
of biographies on him,
and dealt with a
lot of information.
>>REGINA: So what's
your opinion?
>>DYER: I think that
the attention to detail,
and the interest in his art--
and he was known for being
such a hyper-specified, detail
oriented person, and so
difficult to get along with,
that to me suggests that he
put his life into his artwork.
And somebody that
would do that, I
find that hard to believe
that they would be--
>>REGINA: Being
controlled and manipulated
by the intelligence community?
>>DYER: Now, I think that NASA
and different intelligence
agencies were very interested
in the work that he was doing,
and they wanted him to put
things in a certain way.
>>REGINA: Like Philip K Dick.
>>DYER: Exactly.
But I see him as
a genuine artist.
But what we see in
"Eyes Wide Shut"
is the presentation of how
the class structure really
works in society.
And what's interesting about
Bill and Alice Harford,
and that's the Nicole
and Tom Cruise character,
is that they think that they're
at the top of the totem pole.
They're elite New York
physicians, or she's an artist
and he's a physician.
They think that that's
the top of the totem pole.
They don't realize
that above them there's
a whole other power structure
of the invisible hand,
the cryptocracy, shadow
government, whatever you're
going to call it, who
are immensely more
wealthy than they can imagine.
And they are able to
basically construct reality
in the film's presentation
such that it leads Bill Harford
down this path of initiation.
And that's the way
I see the film,
is that Bill is being
initiated into this cult.
It is a sex cult.
It's a sex magic cult.
It's a human sacrifice
cult, because that's
what they do with the girl
who's the beauty pageant woman.
She's sacrificed at the end.
And they take it very seriously.
And they don't take Bill's
flippant attitude lightly.
So what they do is
they profile him,
they reveal to
him his own flaws.
You mentioned earlier the chink
in the armor about recruitment
for intelligence
agencies and assets.
Cults and intelligence
agencies have operated the same
for a long time, and that's
what they do in the film.
They know his weakness,
his marital problems.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>DYER: Sexual issues.
And they exploit that and expose
him at the end of the film,
and he's made to be the
fool and the hypocrite.
I'm not saying that the cult
was right in their actions.
But part of the film is
trying to show to him
his hypocrisy and his error.
Because he thinks
he knows it all.
And he simultaneously
knowing it all,
he doesn't even know
who's running things.
>>REGINA: No, that's never
answered in any film.
Let's take a look
at a clip early
on in the film, where it's
explained to him by Ziegler,
you need to stay away from this.
You don't want to go here.
OK?
We'll take a quick peek.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- Why would they do that?
- Why?
In plain words, to scare
the living shit out of you.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>REGINA: So of course,
he goes there anyway.
You know, he can't help
but follow the thread.
Because he is being inspired
by his marriage difficulties
in this moment, right?
So one of the things as you
get into this part of the film
at the initiation of
the ritualistic events
is that elite--
the elite have exhausted
every simple pleasure
there is in life, in general.
And we see this all
the time with anyone
who gets ends up with
quick money, quick fame,
and so forth.
They start
immediately exhausting
meaningful, simple
pleasures, and you
have to go on to greater, and
greater, and greater stimuli.
And really, this party
scene-- which we won't show
because it's a little too
graphic, and a lot of nudity--
is showing what it takes to
even feel anything anymore
for these people.
>>DYER: That's a
great point, yeah.
We mentioned earlier
that desensitization
on the last show that
happens to the population.
And really it's a reflection
of the desensitization that's
happened on the part of the
elite, and perhaps the views
that they might
have been raised in.
And so that kind of produces
this dissociative state
where you don't feel emotions.
We know that about
psychopaths, that there's
certain actions
that are required
for them that are very brutal
for them to feel anything.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>DYER: And so I think
that the goal here
is to show the psychology, the
psychopathy of not just Bill's
class of persons,
but also the elite,
and also the class
of persons that
might be below Bill
because of his interactions
with the prostitutes.
And so we get a picture
of the psychology
of all these classes, and their
motivations, and their actions.
And what we see, I think,
that's the most revealing
about this film is that
there's a somewhat obscure book
by a guy named John
Fowles, who's a postmodern
author in the last century.
And he wrote a book
called "The Magus."
And in "The Magus," there
is a Greek billionaire
who essentially organizes these
large scale trickery, deception
machinations that involve
actors and different people.
And it's all to play
a trick on this sort
of nihilistic young
academic scholar
from Oxford named Nicholas Urfe.
And Nicholas is being brought
through a process of revelation
just like Bill
Harford in this film.
So there's amazing parallels
between these two films.
And the ritual aspects,
the degradation aspects,
all of that, that is part of
the trauma based mind control
that we mentioned last time.
And so it's really
a difficult question
to nail down if Alice herself
is part of this cult or not.
I tend to lean towards thinking
that she is, because she
places the mask on the pillow.
She has the dream
about the situation
that she's just been at, or
that Bill has been at, the orgy
and so forth.
And I find it hard to believe
that she could do these things.
>>REGINA: Well, the ways
she messed with his head.
>>DYER: Exactly.
There's a scene also where
she mentions having money.
And Bill walks in and she's
reading to the daughter
about math problems.
And she says, so-and-so
has more money.
And she looks up, and that's
indicating to Bill that I
know who you're dealing with.
You're dealing with
people that are above you,
and they have a lot
more money than you do.
And I think that's
a key indicator
that she's part of it.
And she's probably been raised
in this cult, too, from youth.
And so she's unfortunately
locked into that.
>>REGINA: And she's both
beguiling to him on one hand,
and totally traumatizing
to him the other.
Very classic of how she
would have been trained.
>>DYER: Exactly.
She would have been
probably brutalized
and traumatized, perhaps
like their daughter will be.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And it's interesting,
because again, I
keep going back to the notion
that whoever these elite are
are dancing on the
razor's edge, yet
in a world of extreme
refinement, and beauty,
and classical music, making it
look so seductive to outsiders
who don't have access
to these things.
>>DYER: Yeah the that's
exemplified at the beginning
at the Christmas ball, where
you have this Hungarian guy,
Sandor Szavost, which
is very close to--
>>REGINA: Slimy.
>>DYER: But very
close to the idea
of Anton Szandor La Vey, right?
And Szavost cites Ovid's
books on the seduction
of married people.
Ovid is the Latin poet,
and he cites Ovid on that.
>>REGINA: Yes, that was
an interesting comment.
>>DYER: Because he's trying
to seduce her at the same time
that these two British girls are
trying to seduce the Tom Cruise
character, Bill.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>DYER: And what happens is
that they're both being tempted
to commit marriage infidelity.
And I think that what most
people don't recognize
about that scene is
that it is specifically
mentioned that the two
girls are Windsors.
One of them is Nuala Windsor.
So we get the idea that these
are British elites, right?
And that is a constant
theme in Kubrick films.
Kubrick oftentimes
does this, where
he pictures the British elite
as very decadent, and so forth.
He lived in London, right?
So he would probably
know about that.
And it's also shown in the
scene at the costume shop owner
right?
Where he is actually
pimping out his daughter,
played by Leelee Sobieski.
And you have to have
the subtitles on
to see this part of the film
or you won't hear it, but she
at a certain point
whispers in Bill's ear
when he's there to purchase
a costume, she says,
you'll need an ermine cloak.
An ermine cloak is what was
worn by European nobility.
>>REGINA: Royalty, yeah.
That part was fascinating.
And as you're saying this
character, this Hungarian suave
man who's courting Nicole
Kidman in the film,
and she's kind of
drunkenly or silly playing
along so to speak.
This comment he made
about marital relations,
and the beauty is that each
has to involve themselves
in the mutual
deception to the other.
And it's like, whoa,
it's really twisted.
>>DYER: It is.
And again, that's from
Ovid's book on how
to seduce married persons.
So you have this
famous Latin poet
writing this old
famous treatise on how
to wreck marriages, basically,
and social climb your way up
the ladder.
>>REGINA: What was the
purpose of the Christmas trees
amongst this?
All throughout the
movie were depictions
and lit up Christmas trees,
from the prostitute's apartment
to the galas?
>>DYER: I think that the
impression that we're
given about this cult is
that they have a very dark,
nefarious tone about them.
And so that would suggest to
me that it's some form of,
I wouldn't say
outright Satanism,
but some form of the dark
side of the cult operation.
>>REGINA: Why Christmas trees?
>>DYER: Well, what happens is
that for some occultic groups,
the idea is that you can
take things that are good
and invert them.
And that that produces a
kind of black magic effect
that the good thing is inverted.
And so the idea of Christmas
being, well, it's about Jesus,
it's about happy--
>>REGINA: Happy
connection, yeah.
>>DYER: Exactly.
And that's why
sometimes we'll see
a lot of possibly high
profile occult things
that happen on Christmas.
So for example, when
did JonBent Ramsey die?
It was Christmas, right.
So those kinds of things are
done, I think, intentionally.
And I think what
Kubrick is saying
is that it's Christmas time,
but it's not what you think.
This is a dark Christmas,
where we're not
getting a picture into--
>>REGINA: Santa won't be
coming down your chimney.
>>DYER: Or the stories about
Jesus' sacrifice or anything
like that, it's going to
be a dark sacrifice, which
is how the film ends.
>>REGINA: Right and
they're also there
in, I'm guessing
it's FAO Schwarz,
they're in a Christmas store
that looks like FAO Schwarz
shopping.
And then there's a game on the
shelf called the magic circle
game.
So talk about that
scene and what
that means in the larger sense.
>>DYER: At the original
Christmas party,
there are a large, lit
up inverted pentagrams.
And so there's
nothing inherently
evil about a pentagram.
But in certain, as I
mentioned, trends of cults
and the dark side
of things, they
believe that the
inversion of things
signifies the dark power.
>>REGINA: So it's an
inverted pentagram.
>>DYER: Exactly.
At the Christmas party,
you'll see the lights
in the background,
of Bill and Alice--
and quite consistently
through the film
there are inverted pentagrams.
So in the magic circle scene--
>>REGINA: On the floor included.
>>DYER: Yes.
In the magic circle scene,
when the game is set up
and FAO Schwarz, the
game includes inverted--
and there's inverted
pentagrams up
on the rafters, as well,
part of the display.
And I think that's
intentional, especially
if you understand the attention
to detail that Kubrick
has in his films.
There's not going to be--
>>REGINA: Nothing is
there by accident.
>>DYER: So we get the idea that
this is a symbolic portrayal
of manifestations of--
well, sometimes films
will force signify
what's going to happen
through symbolism.
And so the earlier pentagrams,
and the earlier versions
of circles and so forth,
this is the magic circle
that's at the occult ritual.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>DYER: And so the magic circle
in the final scene, I think,
suggests the possibility that
their eyes are no longer wide
shut, they're now wide open.
>>REGINA: Once they step into
the middle of the circle.
>>DYER: Exactly.
>>REGINA: And also, we'll
get to the end in a minute.
But Tom Cruise, left hand over
the heart, thumb pointing up.
This has overlays
with Aleister Crowley?
>>DYER: In Crowley's system,
he would borrow a lot of ideas
from Masonry.
Because he was kind
of a upper level,
he believed,
post-graduate Mason.
And so a lot of the
symbols are borrowed.
And so you have a kind of--
>>REGINA: But taking it
to the really dark side.
>>DYER: Oh, absolutely.
And so you have the idea of
just a kind of oath of secrecy
is what that signifies.
And so I'm speculating there.
I can't prove that,
nor do I know for sure.
I'm just saying that--
>>REGINA: You're just noticing
that that hand symbol--
>>DYER: I'm noticing
that that could
signify the possibility of Bill
realizing some sort of secrecy.
I mean, he's going to have to
keep the secrets that he's--
I mean, he's delving
so deeply into this,
and he's seeing how
society's really
run, who's he going to go to?
Can't go to the press,
because the film shows that--
>>REGINA: They own everything.
>>DYER: They own the press.
They control the story of
how the beauty queen dies.
Who's he going to go to?
So he's going to have to
keep an oath of secrecy.
>>REGINA: So you
felt, because Ziegler
tried to basically assuage
his fears and say, look,
this was just a show for you.
The whole thing was a setup.
And you know, he
starts-- and now
Tom Cruise's mind is really
kind of broken at this point.
He's like, OK, but I
know, I saw what I saw.
I went to her apartment,
I talked to her roommate.
And so what is your take on
what actually happens there
at the end of the film?
>>DYER: I think that Ziegler
is lying with seeds of truth.
So I do think that
it's partly true.
>>REGINA: Just like the media.
>>DYER: Mhm.
It's partly true that
a lot of these events
are organized for Bill.
And I think that if the cult
really was worried, or wasn't
interested in bringing Bill in,
they could have taken him out,
easily.
They killed a beauty
queen, no problem.
They could have gotten rid
of Bill if they wanted to.
But they are
intentionally leading Bill
down this long road, this
long process of initiation
and alchemical revelation.
It's what one writer calls
a self transformative psycho
drama.
And that's what Bill
is participating in.
And we as the
audience, I believe,
are participating with
Bill in this process.
>>REGINA: I was just
going to say that.
They're taking you into
all of the revelations,
and eeriness of that
initiation process
into the decadence
of their world,
into the lack of compassion,
the expendability of women.
Women are totally expendable
creatures in this.
>>DYER: Yeah, we get the
impression that they basically
got all these girls out of the
supermodel world, or beauty
queen world, and they can
do whatever they want.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>DYER: And to advance to
the next level, perhaps,
in their careers, you're forced
with the choice of you join
the cult, or you don't.
>>REGINA: Then again, it's
the same in all these films,
and it's the same in the
way this film portrayed it.
Again, you get
into really basic--
we're interfacing with
our brains in this.
Our behavior, our
emotions and such
are reactions that are
happening in our brains.
And again, this
combination of the limbic
center where you have the
centers of violence and sex
literally rubbing up
against each other, right?
And that part
figures prominently,
and it's always at the
expense of the weaker
ones, the disposable ones.
Which in this case
are the women.
>>DYER: Yes this is that
social Darwinian perspective
that originates out
of the Royal Society
and the British elite class.
I'm not saying everybody,
or the British people,
but I'm saying that you
have a trend from Thomas
Malthus in the late 1700s into
characters like Charles Gault
and Darwin, characters
like Aldous Huxley.
And they write openly about the
social Darwinian perspective
that's then applied
to all of society.
And this is where
we get eugenics.
Eugenics comes out
of this philosophy
of fighting and scrapping
to get to the top,
and it doesn't matter who
you smash on the way there.
And that, therefore, dictates
that the weaker species,
so to speak, anybody that
you can just trample on them.
Because it's psychopathy,
and basically it's evil.
And that's what we
see in that film.
And I think Kubrick consistently
presents those kinds of persons
as running things.
>>REGINA: Well, they are.
And I mean, I've had for
whatever reason-- go ahead.
>>DYER: Well I'm reminded
of the other Kubrick film
from an Anthony Burgess
novel, The Clockwork Orange.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>DYER: And in
"Clockwork Orange,"
you have that elite British
social engineering class that
are obsessed with that that
they take the character
that McDowell plays in
Alex and they basically
run him through him
through MK Ultra
to put him in a catatonic
state to civilize him,
to make him part
of civil society.
And the institutionalization
of everything,
of every aspect of life, be it
education, be it university,
be it public schooling,
that is, again,
what Michel Foucault talked
about in his writings
on the prison system,
the punishment system.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>DYER: So that is real,
and it's exemplified
in the films of Kubrick.
And he's presenting it
originating out of that older
British model of Malthusianism.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
And I have had the experience
of knowing a lot of British men
as friends, and I was married
to one Brit which gave me
access to a lot of Brits.
And all of them went
to public school,
which is private school,
elite private schools.
And they started
talking to me privately.
They would tell me
about what it was
like being inside those
environments, and the cruelty,
although they couldn't
even see it as such.
The cruelty even begin
age six and seven of what
they do to these little guys.
I was in tears.
And I thought, this
is child abuse.
But they didn't see it that way.
Oh, no, it's just
to toughen us up.
Finally one said,
it's to toughen us up
to the extent we will
carry out anything
when we come into power.
Because we've been
completely desensitized.
And he actually got
out of the system,
but it was a very brave--
and one of my interviewees
said that actually, too.
That's a very brave
thing to admit
and to be able to discover,
where others completely
bought into it and buy
into it to this day
that they were simply
raised as the privileged.
Relationships are
often hard for them.
>>DYER: And you can see why
that social darwinism fits well
with that perspective.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>DYER: Because
it is dog eat dog,
and the idea is that to
defeat any other enemies,
I would have to be more
wicked than my enemy.
And amazingly, if you look at
the history of we mentioned
intelligence
operations, there's been
a long rivalry between Russia
and the British empire.
And the British perfected
their intelligence operations.
When I mentioned
"Kingsman" earlier,
they perfected their
intelligence operations
through this long time rivalry
between the other empire.
The Soviets or KGB have
said about the British
that they're the most nefarious,
and the most double dealing.
And I'm not talking
about the British people,
I'll make that clear.
>>REGINA: We're talking
about the elite.
>>DYER: But even the specific
families of like the Galtons,
and the Malthus, and
these different characters
like that that write
about how to mind
control large populations.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
And we talk about mind control
and some of the techniques
and protocols used
in MK Ultra and such,
we'll just go to a really
good, nasty college
hazing in the elite schools.
That's starting to
prepare for both.
>>DYER: And that's borrowed
from older military tactics
of how you put people
through boot camp.
What's another one of
Kubrick's top films?
"Full Metal Jacket."
And you get the character
who basically goes nuts
from this mind control
trauma of boot camp.
Yeah.
>>REGINA: OK, so that
takes care of that.
We're going to
wrap up "Eyes Wide
Shut," unless you have the
final wrap statement on that.
>>DYER: "Eyes Wide Shut" is
Kubrick's symbolic presentation
of how the elite are
able to manipulate us
through understanding the
basics of human psychology
and the manipulation
of our baser drives.
That is the essence
of that film.
>>REGINA: Yes, OK.
And it was kind of
painful to watch again.
I have to say, I didn't
particularly enjoy it.
But I did take good notes.
OK, now we're into
a more modern film.
I think it was '14
or '15, "Ex Machina."
It's a relatively new film.
And this whole notion, again,
of the rational obsession
with technology in the
place of human interface.
So lay this out for us.
>>DYER: Yes this is very real.
I've recently done an
extended lecture series
on Carroll Quigley's
"Tragedy and Hope."
Carroll Quigley was the
professor from Georgetown
who was actually able
to write this 1300 page
tome from the CFR archives.
So what we're getting here is
the Western establishment's
apologetic and defense
of its own operations
in the last 100 years,
including both world wars.
Now, what Quigley says at
the culmination of that book
is that we're entering
the era of quantification.
He wrote that in
1966, and he's saying
that we're entering the
age of AI, cybernetics.
And by quantification,
what he means
is viewing everything in
reality as purely mathematically
regimented and quantifiable.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>DYER: And that's getting rid
of qualitative aspects of life
that would be good, bad.
None of those things
matter anymore.
The only thing that
matters is, do the math,
does it justify xyz?
This comes from an
older British tradition
that we mentioned in the
last show of utilitarianism.
Utilitarians thought that--
I'm not making this up.
This is how goofy
the philosophy is--
that you can do moral calculus,
that you could actually come up
with an equation
that would tell you
which actions were good or bad.
And it would be based on
the pleasure principle.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>DYER: And so this
is utterly ridiculous,
but it's the logical
result of a fallacy
of reductionist materialism.
Now, "Ex Machina"
presents the culmination
of this long tradition
of materialism.
This idea that can we
create a synthetic version
of everything, basically?
>>REGINA: Including us.
>>DYER: Including us.
So when it comes to the
android, or the cyborg,
or the replicant, I think
that in sci-fi there's
a long tradition
that really reaches
a peak in "Blade Runner."
And in "Blade
Runner," what we see
is this really
crucial connection
between sexuality, sex
operatives, mind control,
and AI.
We're not going to touch on it,
but there is a deep connection
between those.
So even though it sounds like
what would AI and transhumanism
have to do with MK Ultra and
sex operatives or mind control?
Well, it's those
experiments that we
talked about earlier
where they began
implanting electrodes
and dealing
with the possibility
of splitting the mind
and so forth that we get the
progression of moving man
into being a robot.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>DYER: And that's what
we see in "Ex Machina,"
is this idea of
a grand test that
is not a test on
who we think it is,
at least initially in the film.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>DYER: So what is this test?
Well, we're going to
see if maybe the older
idea of the Turing
test of Alan Turing,
can a robot prove it has
self-consciousness or rational
choice between
different options?
And we think that in
the film, the character,
that sort of nerdy tech guy
that's brought in by this--
>>REGINA: Just kind
of a modest man
who's doing technical analysis.
>>DYER: By this tech
genius guy who lives up
in the hills, mountains.
>>REGINA: Total manipulator.
>>DYER: Total manipulator.
And he brings them in
under the guise of,
I want you to run the tests
on this new hot AI bot
that I've created.
And I want you to determine
if you think she can pass it.
And what we find out is
that the entire operation
is a psychological
manipulation on the guy.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>DYER: And he's the
real test subject.
The AI is already essentially
conscious, for film purposes,
we'll say.
And I think the most
revelatory aspect to this film
is that there is this
idea of a global brain.
And this is, the
supercomputers are essentially
storing all the
data, and this would
be data based on everyone's
profile of their search history
or whatever.
And so then it can be
tailored to that person.
And so the AI bot played
by Alicia Vikander,
she plays this character who
is essentially everything
that he wants.
>>REGINA: Match
his porn profiles.
Did you match my porn
profile in creating her?
That was interesting.
>>DYER: And so that's the
best way to manipulate him.
And so that's why I mentioned
earlier sex operatives and sex
espionage in mind control.
That was perfected in
MK Ultra operations,
in the NKVD's operations
with Russian orphans
and prostitutes.
They figured out how to do this.
And in this case, it's a robotic
version of sexual manipulation
that's applied to the guy.
And that's his weakness,
and he falls for it.
And we also get this
interesting scene
where the tech genius guy has
created other AI sex bots.
He's got like a wardrobe.
>>REGINA: This man is
not skilled at interface
with humans.
>>DYER: Yeah, he's got
his wardrobe full of--
>>REGINA: Sex bots.
>>DYER: Sex bots.
And this is now reality, we see
news stories in the mainstream
now that the Japanese sex bots
are being created and stuff.
And this is going to replace
humans, and so forth.
So what is interesting is that
the human subconscious that
played out or Carl
Jung talked about,
this is being mimicked
on a synthetic level
with AI and super computers.
So for example, part of
free will or volition
is the idea that
influences or thought
processes arise from somewhere.
Our subconscious, presumably.
And that's part of
how we have free will,
because we choose this or that.
The question is, for AI,
how do you mimic free will?
Because that's really the
defining characteristic
of a human being.
>>REGINA: It just
has to come down
to the mathematical
probabilities
in their programming.
>>DYER: In their mind, right.
And so what they need is a
mimic of the subconscious.
How do you do that?
You have a giant
supercomputer that stores--
>>REGINA: Experience.
>>DYER: --all of its
vast data from everyone.
That's what the supercomputers
and the NSA are there for.
So what they do is
they weaponize that,
and they create what they
think is the embodiment
of a conscious computer.
And it's this psychopathic
sexbot killer babe.
And it doesn't go well for them.
It's a big mistake.
>>REGINA: Oh, no.
It turns on them.
Their own weakness
turns against them.
And again, they think
they can exploit, protect,
whatever, the feminine,
which actually these beings
turn on them.
These created
beings turn on them.
Which is interesting,
because they're
appealing to the flattery
and ability of men to succumb
to feminine flattery, just
like in the film "Her."
>>DYER: Absolutely I did
analysis of that film, as well.
>>REGINA: Yeah I mean, I
found that fascinating.
She's everything I
could ever want--
who would ever want anything
more than this person who's
there for you?
To see you, feel you,
hear you, hear you out.
Same thing in this film.
>>DYER: There's
a funny film that
presents the exact same
theme in a B movie way,
and that's called "Cherry 2000."
>>REGINA: I never saw that.
>>DYER: You got to watch that.
It's goofy, but it
has Melanie Griffith
in it playing the
real human character,
and this guy's whole quest
is after this AI bot.
So it's very similar
to "Ex Machina."
And what he learns at the
end of the whole story
is that actually, the human
that I've met this whole time
is the best match for me,
not this ideal thing that's
not real.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
OK, so let's look at let's
take a peek at a clip
from the film in which now she's
starting to manipulate him.
OK, let's take a peek.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- Do you have people who test
you and might switch you off?
- No, I don't.
- Then why do I?
[END PLAYBACK]
>>REGINA: I love that.
He's now thinking, I've
got to get her out of here.
This guy's working--
he's going to kill her.
>>DYER: Yeah, very deep film.
Very philosophical,
a lot of references
to philosophers in that film.
Two literary
subjects, and I think
there's a lot of kabbalistic
symbolism in that film,
as well, which I think is
interesting for the notion
of computer technology.
Because computer technology
does historically
arise out of cryptography,
symbology, and kabbalism.
>>REGINA: And the whole notion
of being totally reliant
upon, again, the rational
aspect of the mind makes people,
but men seem to succumb more,
weaker rather than stronger.
>>DYER: It reminds me of
the dialogue between Carl
Jung and Wolfgang Pauli.
Wolfgang Pauli was
a famous physicist
who was sort of a pioneer of
quantum physics and quantum
theory.
And he was having
personal problems,
psychological problems that he
felt he needed a psychiatrist.
So the best guy he could
find was Carl Jung,
and Carl Jung said the problem
is that you're completely
dominant with left brain.
And you've forgotten your
right side, intuitive side.
And when he reconciled that,
he made some pretty amazing
discoveries because
he was able to combine
the left and the right brain.
>>REGINA: Yes, and we talked
about this in the last show.
Hollywood seldom does this.
They didn't do it in this one,
but to disastrous consequences
for all parties.
And again, this is about--
and the man says this,
I forget the name of the
character the gajillionaire who
this is all his creation--
is that the goal is
to become God, right?
>>DYER: Yes.
>>REGINA: We are gods.
We create this technology
because we are gods.
>>DYER: Yeah, a lot of these
inventions that we've--
>>REGINA: The mind is God.
>>DYER: Yeah, a lot of
these things that we've seen
come out, the
internet and so forth,
these arise out of DARPA.
These arise out of the
Pentagon military weaponization
apparatus.
>>REGINA: It's a God
complex of humanity.
And this really
exemplifies that.
We only have a few
minutes left, and we've
got to get to "Casino Royale."
So any final
statements on "Ex--"
I say "Mackina."
you say "Machina."
>>DYER: You're probably
right, it is Latin.
The name itself is an indicator
of what the film is about,
they use "ex machina."
And this is the old Greek idea
of, within literary tradition,
the god from within the
system is rolled out
as a kind of explanatory
power literary device.
It gives you an explanation
for all the events
that happened in the Greek play.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>DYER: And so in this case,
it's a statement about the idea
that God, in the
transhumanist Darwinian sense,
will arise within the
eminent history itself
to basically become God, right?
And this is how Ray Kurzweil
and other transhumanist say.
Ray Kurzweil says, I
don't believe in God yet,
but I'll know when I'm God.
>>REGINA: You're right,
not a fan of his.
So OK, let's wrap that up.
Thank you, that was a
beautiful explanation.
Let's go on with our
last few minutes left
to "Casino Royale," which
was, I think for myself
and a lot of women, of course,
it was perhaps my favorite Bond
film--
I think I've seen all of them--
simply because there
was a human element that
extended beyond all of his
other training and programming,
that's called love.
>>DYER: When I did
my graduate work,
I was really impressed
with the actual depth
behind a lot of
these Fleming stories
that are not perceptible
on the surface.
We tend to think of it as pulp
fiction, or goofy, or silly.
But when you learn
about Fleming,
you realize that he actually
worked in British Naval PSYOPS.
And he was very
intimately involved
in a lot of black and covert
operations in World War II.
And so when he's
writing these stories,
he's writing from what he's
actually seeing in the world.
Now, he does combine
a lot of fiction,
and combines characters
that he knew in real life
into these fictional characters.
But that's what makes
it so interesting,
is that he himself being an
agent of Her Majesty's Secret
Service, he can
understand what it's
like to be a character who
works at the behest of the state
and kills for the state.
And I think that Fleming was
at least sincere in showing us
in the first novel, "Casino
Royale," that inner struggle,
that that kind of a person has.
>>REGINA: Has to be.
>>DYER: So you're given
the impression that it's
a virtue to kill for the state.
But you've been
traumatized by the state
to be in that position.
So for example, the 00 status,
that's actually a real thing
in British intelligence.
That's not me, that's
in public books.
There's a book called "Art of
Betrayal" by Gordon Corera,
where he talks about
the 00 status being real
in the history of
British intelligence.
And the way that
you get that as you
have to have a certain
number of kills.
And Bond the character
has reached this status,
and he's now de-sensitized.
He doesn't have
regard for human life
anymore, because he's that
psychopathic machinelike
killer programmed, and MK Ultra
does play into the Bond novels.
"You Only Live Twice,"
he specifically goes
through mind control.
So unfortunately that's
happened to Bond,
and you're right to bring
up Vesper Lynd, who's
his love interest in both
the film and the novel.
>>REGINA: Eva Green, wonderful.
>>DYER: The film is pretty
close to the novel, actually.
And what happens is that
he feels betrayed by her,
and so that was his
last sort of flirtation.
>>REGINA: But he allowed himself
to completely go there with her
before that, as
much as you could--
I could never fathom that a
Bond with that conditioning
could go there, and could
go into the depth of a love
relationship with
someone, even to the point
of planning their future.
Their domestic-- as much
as it can be-- exciting
domestic life.
>>DYER: It's funny,
because in the novels,
Fleming actually later
has Bond get married.
So he keeps trying.
He keeps being sort of pulled
back into the world of--
>>REGINA: He wants to be human.
He wants to be human.
And this I found fascinating.
This one particular scene,
let's look at this one scene.
To me this just, I was in tears
the first time I saw the movie.
I don't know, there was
something that was almost
left me with a state
of elation and tears
at the same time when she has
been chased and traumatized,
and she's sitting in the
bottom of the shower.
OK let's take a peek at that.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
[END PLAYBACK]
>>REGINA: Women
all over the world,
when they saw that
scene, saw Bond
in a completely different way.
And you were pulling
for something new
to emerge from this character.
>>DYER: Bond loves Vesper Lynd.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>DYER: And that is what, in
the storyline of the reboot
and in the original novel,
is what hardens him.
So because he feels betrayed
by the person that he
actually finally did love--
and he's also an orphan.
That's important to the
story of Bond, because--
>>REGINA: Oh, yes, yes.
>>DYER: --the state steps
in as his de facto mommy.
And so he works for Her Majesty.
He has a handler, M. Those
are his parental figures,
they're stand-ins for the
parental figures he never had.
>>REGINA: It's the only
family he ever had.
>>DYER: And I mentioned
earlier the NKVD,
why do you think they would draw
from orphans and prostitutes?
Because they're missing those
familial figures, right?
They make good
agents of the state.
So Bond feels betrayed
and hurt by the loss
of the last possibility
he has for love.
And that's what
basically sends him
on this sort of psychopathic
Nietzschean program killing
spree.
>>REGINA: Right.
Anything else you'd like
to embed in that quickly?
>>DYER: There's amazing
revelations in "Casino Royale."
We have the idea
of the put options.
So the Le Chiffre character,
played by Mads Mikkelsen--
>>REGINA: 9/11 in that.
>>DYER: Exactly, exactly.
>>REGINA: American
and United Airlines.
>>DYER: And so even
though this is after 9/11,
it's kind of hinting at the
possibility of what went down
on 9/11.
Mads Mikkelsen is actually
based on the character
of Aleister Crowley.
The Le Chiffre character
is based on Crowley.
>>REGINA: Blood dripping
out of his ducts.
Fascinating.
>>DYER: The name, Le
Chiffre, means cipher.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
Yeah, fascinating.
And again, I just
wanted to say, I
appreciate your work
as a philosopher
of film and cinematography
to analyze these things
and help us take a look
at how we're constantly
being controlled and manipulated
if we're not paying attention.
>>DYER: Right.
>>REGINA: Right.
And I think we have reason
to get back together again.
I'm sure we'll be
seeing you back on Gaia.
>>DYER: OK.
>>REGINA: Thanks, Jay.
>>DYER: Sounds great.
Had a good time.
>>REGINA: Again, for
continued analysis,
you can pick up a
copy of "Esoteric
Hollywood" at major booksellers,
and go to jaysanalysis.com.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Open Minds.